Ref-based RNA-Seq: expand DEG analysis (#1549)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/ref-based/tutorial.md

layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: "Reference-based RNA-Seq data analysis"
tags:
    - bulk
    - rna-seq
zenodo_link: "https://zenodo.org/record/1185122"
questions:
    - What are the steps to process RNA-seq data?

>     - How to identify differentially expressed genes between different conditions?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - How to identify differentially expressed genes across multiple experimental conditions?
```

    - What are the biological functions impacted by the differential expression of genes?
objectives:
    - Check a sequence quality report generated by FastQC for RNA-seq data
    - Explain the principle and specificity of mapping of RNA-seq data to an eukaryotic reference genome

>     - Select and run the state of the art mapping tool for RNA-seq data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Select and run a state of the art mapping tool for RNA-seq data
```

    - Evaluate the quality of mapping results
    - Describe the process to estimate the library strandness
    - Estimate the number of reads per genes

>     - Explain the count normalization to do before sample comparison

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Explain the count normalization to perform before sample comparison
```

>     - Construct and run a differential gene expression analysis to compare different conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Construct and run a differential gene expression analysis
```

key_points:
    - A spliced mapping tool should be used on eukaryotic RNA seq data

>     - Numerous factors should be taken into account when running a differential gene expression

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Numerous factors should be taken into account when running a differential gene expression analysis
```

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

> RNA-seq is used to analyze the continuously changing cellular transcriptome, the set of all RNA molecules in one cell or a population of cells. Specifically, RNA-seq facilitates the ability to look at alternative gene spliced transcripts, post-transcriptional modifications, gene fusion, mutations/SNPs and changes in gene expression over time, or differences in gene expression in different groups or treatments

Author: You suggested these changes:

![Screenshot 2019-09-13 at 12 53 36](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1842467/64857716-a01e8700-d625-11e9-8f78-3f1c5dd6fbe6.png)

> RNA-Seq is used to analyze the continuously changing cellular transcriptome, the set of all RNA molecules in one cell or a population of cells. Specifically, RNA-Seq facilitates the ability to look at alternative gene spliced transcripts, post-transcriptional modifications, gene fusion, mutations/SNPs and changes in gene expression over time, or differences in gene expression in different groups or treatments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RNA-seq is used to analyze the continuously changing cellular transcriptome, the set of all RNA molecules in one cell or a population of cells. Specifically, RNA-seq facilitates the ability to look at alternative gene spliced transcripts, post-transcriptional modifications, gene fusion, mutations/SNPs and changes in gene expression over time, or differences in gene expression in different groups or treatments
```

> In the study of {% cite brooks2011conservation %}, the authors wanted to identify exons regulated by the *Pasilla* gene (the *Drosophila* homologue of the mammalian splicing regulators Nova-1 and Nova-2 proteins) using RNA sequencing data. They depleted the *Pasilla* (*PS*) gene in *Drosophila melanogaster* by RNA interference (RNAi).

Reviewer 2: But very often there is no link, but just the reference in the reference section

> In the study of {% cite brooks2011conservation %}, the authors wanted to identify exons regulated by the *Pasilla* gene (the *Drosophila* homologue of the mammalian splicing regulators Nova-1 and Nova-2 proteins) using RNA sequencing data. They depleted the *Pasilla* (*PS*) gene in *Drosophila melanogaster* by RNA interference (RNAi).

Author: I am not sure to understand you there

> Do you want to learn more about the principles behind mapping? Follow our [training]({{site.baseurl}}{% link topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/mapping/tutorial.md %}).
{: .comment}

As a reference genome for *Drosophila melanogaster* is available, we can map the sequences to this genome in order to identify which genes are affected by the *Pasilla* gene depletion.

> {% include topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/mapping/ref_genome_explanation.md answer_3="The genome of *Drosophila melanogaster* is known and assembled and it can be used as the reference genome in this analysis. Note that new versions of reference genomes may be released if the assembly improves, for this tutorial we are going to use the Release 6 of the *Drosophila melanogaster* reference genome assembly [(dm6)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4383921/)."%}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% include topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/mapping/ref_genome_explanation.md answer_3="The genome of *Drosophila melanogaster* is known and assembled and it can be used as the reference genome in this analysis. Note that new versions of reference genomes may be released if the assembly improves, for this tutorial we are going to use the release 6 of the *Drosophila melanogaster* reference genome assembly [(dm6)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4383921/)."%}
```

>
> Several spliced mappers have been developed over the year with the explosion of RNA-seq data.
>
> [TopHat](https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/tophat/index.shtml) ({% cite trapnell2009tophat %}) was one of the first tools designed specifically to address this problem. In TopHat reads are mapped against the genome and are separated into two categories: (1) those that map, and (2) those that initially unmapped (IUM). "Piles" of reads representing potential exons are extended in search of potential donor/acceptor splice sites and potential splice junctions are reconstructed. IUMs are then mapped to these junctions.
>

> >    ![TopHat](../../images/tophat.png "TopHat (Trapnell et al, Bioinformatics, 2009)")

Author: It should be fixed now

>
> TopHat has been subsequently improved with the development of TopHat2 {% cite kim2013tophat2 %}:
>
>    ![TopHat2](../../images/13059_2012_Article_3053_Fig6_HTML.jpg "TopHat2 (Kim et al, Genome Biology, 2013)")
>

> > To further optimize and speed up spliced read alignment ({% cite kim2015hisat %}) developed [HISAT](https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/index.shtml). It uses a set of [FM-indices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FM-index) consisting one global genome-wide index and a collection of ~48,000 local overlapping 42 kb indices (~55,000 56 kb indices in HISAT2). This allows to find initial seed locations for potential read alignments in the genome using global index and to rapidly refine these alignments using a corresponding local index:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> To further optimize and speed up spliced read alignment ({% cite kim2015hisat %}) [HISAT](https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/hisat2/index.shtml) was developed. It uses a set of [FM-indices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FM-index) consisting one global genome-wide index and a collection of ~48,000 local overlapping 42 kb indices (~55,000 56 kb indices in HISAT2). This allows to find initial seed locations for potential read alignments in the genome using global index and to rapidly refine these alignments using a corresponding local index:
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Spliced mapping
>

> > 1. Import the Ensembl gene annotation for *Drosophila melanogaster* (`Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf`) from the Shared Data library if available or from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}/files/Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf) into your current Galaxy history

Author: For the shared data library, it may change from one Galaxy instance to the other. Usually we say it during the workshop. I mention that it could be available on the shared data but without giving any path, but also from UCSC

> During a typical RNA-seq experiment the information about strandedness is lost after both strands of cDNA are synthesized, size selected, and converted into a sequencing library. However, this information can be quite useful for the read counting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During a typical RNA-seq experiment the information about strandedness is lost after both strands of cDNA are synthesized, size selected, and converted into a sequencing library. However, this information can be quite useful for the read counting step.
```

Some library preparation protocols create so called *stranded* RNA-seq libraries that preserve the strand information (an excellent overview in {% cite levin2010comprehensive %}). The implication of stranded RNA-seq is that you can distinguish whether the reads are derived from forward or reverse-encoded transcripts:

> ![Stranded RNAseq data look like this](../../images/stranded_result.png "Non-stranded vs. strand-specific RNA-seq read alignment (image from GATC Biotech)")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Stranded RNA-seq data look like this](../../images/stranded_result.png "Non-stranded vs. strand-specific RNA-seq read alignment (image from GATC Biotech)")
```

>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. The table has two columns: the gene ID and the number of reads (or fragments in the case of paired-end reads) mapped to the gene

> > > 2. To display the most abundantly detected feature, we need to sort the table of counts. This can be done using the **Sort** {% icon tool %} tool, by sorting the table on the second column (which contains the number of reads = counts) in descending order. The result of sorting the table on column 2 reveals that FBgn0000556 is the feature with the most counts (around 128,741 in `GSM461177` and 127,416 in `GSM461180`).

Author: Done

> >
> > 1. The table has two columns: the gene id and the number of reads (or fragments in the case of paired-end reads) mapped to the gene
> > 2. To display the most abundantly detected feature, we need to sort the table of counts. This can be done using the **Sort** {% icon tool %} tool, by sorting the table on the second column in descending order. This reveals that FBgn0000556 is the feature with the most counts (around 128,741 in `GSM461177` and 127,416 in `GSM461180`).
> > 

> > >    Comparing output is easier if we can view more than one dataset simultaneously. The Scratchbook allows us to build up a collection of datasets that will be shown on the screen together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >    Comparing different output files is easier if we can view more than one dataset simultaneously. The Scratchbook function allows us to build up a collection of datasets that will be shown on the screen together.
```

> >    
> >    > ### {% icon hands_on %} (Optional) View the sorted featureCounts using the Scratchbook
> >    >
> >    > 1. The **Scratchbook** is enabled by clicking the nine-blocks icon seen on the right of the Galaxy top menubar:
> >    >
> >    >    ![scratchbook icon](../../images/ref-based/menubarWithScratchbook.png "Menu bar with Scratchbook icon")
> >    >

> > >    > 2. When the Scratchbook is **enabled** datasets being viewed are added to the Scratchbook:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >    > 2. When the Scratchbook is **enabled** datasets being viewed (by clicking the eye-icon) are added to the Scratchbook view:
```

> >    >

> > >    >    ![scratchbook icon enabled](../../images/ref-based/menubarWithScratchbookEnabled.png "Menu bar with Scratchbook icon enabled")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >    >    ![Scratchbook icon enabled](../../images/ref-based/menubarWithScratchbookEnabled.png "Menu bar with Scratchbook icon enabled")
```

> >    >
> >    > 3. Click the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon to view one of the **sorted featureCounts**. Instead of occupying the entire middle bar the dataset view is now shown an overlay:
> >    >

> > >    >    ![scratchbook one dataset shown](../../images/ref-based/scratchbookOneDataset.png "Scratchbook showing one dataset overlay")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >    >    ![Scratchbook one dataset shown](../../images/ref-based/scratchbookOneDataset.png "Scratchbook showing one dataset overlay")
```

> >    >
> >    > 4. When a dataset is shown **click in the main interface** to prepare to select another dataset. The interface now shows that there is one saved view in the Scratchbook:
> >    >
> >    >    ![scratchbook one saved view](../../images/ref-based/scratchbookOneSavedView.png "Menu bar with one saved dataset view in Scratchbook")
> >    >
> >    > 5. Next click the {% icon galaxy-eye %} (eye) icon on the **second sorted featureCounts**. The two datasets can now be seen side by side:
> >    >

> > >    >    ![scratchbook two datasets shown](../../images/ref-based/scratchbookTwoDatasetsShown.png "Scratchbook showing two side by side datasets")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >    >    ![Scratchbook two datasets shown](../../images/ref-based/scratchbookTwoDatasetsShown.png "Scratchbook showing two side by side datasets")
```

> >    >
> >    > 6. To **leave** Scratchbook selection mode, click on the **Scratchbook icon** again. Your saved view will still remain for future viewing:
> >    >

> > >    >    ![scratchbook disabled datasets saved](../../images/ref-based/scratchbookDisabledWithSavedDatasets.png "Scratchbook disabled with two datasets saved")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >    >    ![Scratchbook disabled datasets saved](../../images/ref-based/scratchbookDisabledWithSavedDatasets.png "Scratchbook disabled with two datasets saved")
```

The number of sequenced reads mapped to a gene depends then on:

- The **sequencing depth** of the samples

    Samples sequenced with more depth will have more reads mapping to each genes

- The **length of the gene**

    Longer genes will have more reads mapping to them

To make sample or gene comparison, the gene counts need to be normalized. We could use TPM (Transcripts Per Kilobase Million). 

> ### {% icon details %} RPKM, FPKM and TPM?
>
> These three metrics are used to normalize count tables for:
> - sequencing depth (the "Million" part)
> - gene length (the "Kilobase" part)
>
> Let's use the previous example to explain RPK, FPKM and TPM.
>
> For **RPKM** (Reads Per Kilobase Million),
> 1. Compute the the "per million" scaling factor: sum up the total reads in a sample and divide that number by 1,000,000
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 Counts | Sample 2 Counts | Sample 3 Counts
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 10 | 12 | 30
>    B (4kb) | 20 | 25 | 60
>    C (1kb) | 5 | 8 | 15
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 1
>    **Total reads** | 35 | 45 | 106
>    **Scaling factor** | 3.5 | 4.5 | 10.6
>

> >    *For the purpose of the example, we are score using a factor of 10.*

Author: I changed the sentence to "Because of the small values in the example, we are scoring using a factor of 10.". Is it clearer?

> >    *For the purpose of the example, we are score using a factor of 10.*

Reviewer 2: yes

>    
> 2. Divide the read counts by the "per million" scaling factor
>
>    This normalizes for sequencing depth, giving reads per million (RPM)
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 RPM | Sample 2 RPM | Sample 3 RPM
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 2.86 | 2.67 | 2.83
>    B (4kb) | 5.71 | 5.56 | 5.66
>    C (1kb) | 1.43 | 1.78 | 1.432
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.09  
> 
> 3. Divide the RPM values by the length of the gene, in kilobases
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 RPKM | Sample 2 RPKM | Sample 3 RPKM
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 1.43 | 1.33 | 1.42
>    B (4kb) | 1.43 | 1.39 | 1.42
>    C (1kb) | 1.43 | 1.78 | 1.42
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.009  
>

> > **FPKM** (Fragments Per Kilobase Million) is very similar to RPKM. RPKM is for single-end RNA-seq and FPKM for paired-end RNA-seq. With single-end, every read corresponds to a single fragment that was sequenced. With paired-end RNA-seq, a single fragment can be the two reads of a pair, or, if one read in the pair did not map, one read can correspond to a single fragment. FPKM keeps tracks of fragments so that one fragment with 2 reads is counted only once.

Author: Yep in our case we do not consider the pair if one of the read is not mapped. But in some cases, we may keep them. I tried to rephrase a bit the sentence

>
>
> **TPM** (Transcripts Per Kilobase Million) is very similar to RPKM and FPKM, except the order of the operation
> 
> 1. Divide the read counts by the length of each gene in kilobases
> 
>    This gives the reads per kilobase (RPK).
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 RPK | Sample 2 RPK | Sample 3 RPK
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 5 | 6 | 15
>    B (4kb) | 20 | 6.25 | 15

> >    C (1kb) | 5 | 8 | 15

Author: Gene C should be divided by 1, 1kb being the size and Gene D by 10 (10kb size)

>    B (4kb) | 3.33 | 3.09 | 3.326
>    C (1kb) | 3.33 | 3.95 | 3.326
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.1
> 
>
> Contrary to RPKM and FPKM, when calculating TPM, we normalize for gene length first, and then normalize for sequencing depth second. However, the effects of this difference are quite profound, as we could already see with the example.
> 
> The sums of each colum are very different:
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 RPKM | Sample 2 RPKM | Sample 3 RPKM
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 1.43 | 1.33 | 1.42
>    B (4kb) | 1.43 | 1.39 | 1.42
>    C (1kb) | 1.43 | 1.78 | 1.42
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.009
>    **Total** | 4.29 | 4.5 | 4.25
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 TPM | Sample 2 TPM | Sample 3 TPM
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 3.33 | 2.96 | 3.326
>    B (4kb) | 3.33 | 3.09 | 3.326
>    C (1kb) | 3.33 | 3.95 | 3.326
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.1
>    **Total** | 10 | 10 | 10
>
> The sum of all TPMs in each sample are the same. This makes it easier to compare the proportion of reads that mapped to a gene in each sample. In contrast, with RPKM and FPKM, the sum of the normalized reads in each sample may be different, and this makes it harder to compare samples directly.
> 

> > In the example, TPM for gene A in Sample 1 is 3.33 and in sample B is ~3.33. Then the same proportion of total reads mapped to gene A in both samples, because the sum of the TPMs in both samples always add up to the same number (so the denominator required to calculate the proportions is the same, regardless of the sample)

Author: I tried to clarify there. Let me know if it is better

>
> Since RNA-seq is all about comparing relative proportion of reads, TPM seems more appropriate than RPKM/FPKM.
{: .details}

But RNA-seq is often used to compare one tissue type to another. For example, muscle vs epithelial tissue. And it could be that there are a lot of muscle specific genes transcribed in muscle but not in the epithelial tissue. We call that a **difference in library composition**.

It is also possible to see difference in library composition in the same tissue type after the knock out of a transcription factor.

Let's imagine we have RNA-seq counts from 2 samples (same library size: 635 reads), for a genome with 6 genes. The genes have the same expression in both sample, except one: only Sample 1 transcribe genes D, at a high level (563 reads). This means that the 563 reads used by D in Sample 1 will be distributed to other genes in Sample 2.

Gene | Sample 1 | Sample 2
--- | --- | --- | ---
A | 30 | 235
B | 24 | 188
C | 0 | 0
D | 563 | 0
E | 5 | 39
F | 13 | 102
**Total** | 635 | 635

The read counts for all genes but D is really high in Sample 2. But the only differentially expressed genes is gene D.

> TPM, RPKM or FPKM do not deal with these differences in library composition in normalization. But tools like [**DESeq2**](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) ({% cite love2014moderated %}). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TPM, RPKM or FPKM do not deal with these differences in library composition in normalization, but more complex tools, like DESeq2, do. 
```

[**DESeq2**](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) ({% cite love2014moderated %}) is a great tool for dealing with RNA-seq data and running Differential Gene Expression (DGE) analysis. It takes read count files from different samples, combines them into a big table (with genes in the rows and samples in the columns) and applies normalization for **sequencing depth** and **library composition**. 

> ### {% icon details %} Normalization in DESeq2
>
> Let's take an example to illustrate how DESeq2 scales the different samples:
>
> Gene | Sample 1 | Sample 2 | Sample 3
> A | 0 | 10 | 4
> B | 2 | 6 | 12
> C | 33 | 55 | 200
>
> The goal is to calculate a scaling factor for each sample, that takes read depth and library composition into account.
>
> 1. Take the log$$_e$$ of all the values
> 
>     Gene | log(Sample 1) | log(Sample 2) | log(Sample 3)
>     A | -Inf | 2.3 | 1.4
>     B | 0.7 | 1.8 | 2.5
>     C | 3.5 | 4.0 | 5.3
>
> 2. Average each row
>
>     Gene | Average of log values
>     A | -Inf
>     B | 1.7
>     C | 4.3
>

> >     Average of log values (also call geometric average) is used here because it is not easily impacted by outliers (e.g. gene 3 with its outlier for Sample 3)

Author: Yep. good catch

>
> 3. Filter out genes with infinity
>
>     Gene | Average of log values
>      | 
>     B | 1.7
>     C | 4.3
>

> >     It filters out genes with 0 read counts in at least 1 sample, e.g. genes only transcribed in one tissue. 

Author: It is true for all samples. The idea is to compute a scaling factor (in the next steps) with the genes that have a similar level of expression for any condition.

>
>     It helps to focus the scaling factors on genes transcribed at similar levels regardless the condition.
>
> 4. Substract the average log value from the log counts
>
>     Gene | log(Sample 1) | log(Sample 2) | log(Sample 3)
>      |  |  | 
>     B | -1.0 | 0.1 | 0.5
>     C | -0.8 | -0.3 | 1.3
>

> >     $$ log(reads for gene X) - average(log values for reads for gene X) = log(\frac{reads for gene X}{average for gene X})$$

Author: I fixed it now

>
>     This step is checking out the ratio of the reads in each sample to the average across all samples.
>
> 5. Calculate the median of the ratios for each sample
>
>     Gene | log(Sample 1) | log(Sample 2) | log(Sample 3)
>      |  |  | 
>     B | -1.0 | 0.1 | 0.5
>     C | -0.8 | -0.3 | 1.3
>     **Median** | -0.9 | -0.1 | 0.9
>
>     The median is used here to avoid extreme genes (most likely rare ones) from swaying the value too much in one direction. It helps to put more emphasis on moderately expressed genes.
>
> 6. Take the exponential of the medians
>
>     Gene | Sample 1 | Sample 2 | Sample 3
>     **Median** | -0.9 | -0.1 | 0.9

> >     **Scaling factors** | 0.4 | 0.7 | 2.5

Author: I rephrase the sentence: "Compute the scaling factor by taking the exponential of the medians"

>
> 7. Divide the original counts by the scaling factors
>
>     Gene | Sample 1 | Sample 2 | Sample 3

> >     A | 0 | 14 | 2

Author: Because we use the original counts and apply on them the scaling factor

>
> For **RPKM** (Reads Per Kilobase Million),
> 1. Compute the "per million" scaling factor: sum up the total reads in a sample and divide that number by 1,000,000
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 Counts | Sample 2 Counts | Sample 3 Counts
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 10 | 12 | 30
>    B (4kb) | 20 | 25 | 60
>    C (1kb) | 5 | 8 | 15
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 1
>    **Total reads** | 35 | 45 | 106
>    **Scaling factor** | 3.5 | 4.5 | 10.6
>
>    *Because of the small values in the example, we are scoring using a factor of 10.*
>    
> 2. Divide the read counts by the "per million" scaling factor
>
>    This normalizes for sequencing depth, giving reads per million (RPM)
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 RPM | Sample 2 RPM | Sample 3 RPM
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 2.86 | 2.67 | 2.83
>    B (4kb) | 5.71 | 5.56 | 5.66
>    C (1kb) | 1.43 | 1.78 | 1.43
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.09  
> 
> 3. Divide the RPM values by the length of the gene, in kilobases
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 RPKM | Sample 2 RPKM | Sample 3 RPKM
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 1.43 | 1.33 | 1.42
>    B (4kb) | 1.43 | 1.39 | 1.42
>    C (1kb) | 1.43 | 1.78 | 1.42
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.009  
>

> > **FPKM** (Fragments Per Kilobase Million) is very similar to RPKM. RPKM is for single-end RNA-seq and FPKM for paired-end RNA-seq. With single-end, every read corresponds to a single fragment that was sequenced. With paired-end RNA-seq, a single fragment are the two reads of a pair, or if one read in the pair did not map, one read can correspond to a single fragment (in case we decided to keep them). FPKM keeps tracks of fragments so that one fragment with 2 reads is counted only once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **FPKM** (Fragments Per Kilobase Million) is very similar to RPKM. RPKM is for single-end RNA-seq and FPKM for paired-end RNA-seq. With single-end, every read corresponds to a single fragment that was sequenced. With paired-end RNA-seq, two reads of a pair are mapped from a single fragment, or if one read in the pair did not map, one read can correspond to a single fragment (in case we decided to keep these). FPKM keeps tracks of fragments so that one fragment with 2 reads is counted only once.
```

>
>
> **TPM** (Transcripts Per Kilobase Million) is very similar to RPKM and FPKM, except the order of the operation
> 
> 1. Divide the read counts by the length of each gene in kilobases
> 
>    This gives the reads per kilobase (RPK).
>
>    Gene | Sample 1 RPK | Sample 2 RPK | Sample 3 RPK
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 5 | 6 | 15
>    B (4kb) | 5 | 6.25 | 15
>    C (1kb) | 5 | 8 | 15
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.1
> 

> > 2. Compute the "per million" scaling factor: summ up all the RPK values in a sample and divide this number by 1,000,000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 2. Compute the "per million" scaling factor: sum up all the RPK values in a sample and divide this number by 1,000,000
```

>
>    Gene | Sample 1 RPK | Sample 2 RPK | Sample 3 RPK
>    --- | --- | --- | ---
>    A (2kb) | 5 | 6 | 15
>    B (4kb) | 5 | 6.25 | 15
>    C (1kb) | 5 | 8 | 15
>    D (10kb) | 0 | 0 | 0.1
>    **Total RPK** | 15 | 20.25 | 45.1
>    **Scaling factor** | 1.5 | 2.03 | 4.51
>

> >    *Because of the small values in the example, we are scoring using a factor of 10.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    *As above, because of the small values in the example, we are scoring using a factor of 10.*
```

> ### {% icon details %} Normalization in DESeq2
>
> Let's take an example to illustrate how DESeq2 scales the different samples:
>
> Gene | Sample 1 | Sample 2 | Sample 3
> A | 0 | 10 | 4
> B | 2 | 6 | 12
> C | 33 | 55 | 200
>
> The goal is to calculate a scaling factor for each sample, that takes read depth and library composition into account.
>
> 1. Take the log$$_e$$ of all the values
> 
>     Gene | log(Sample 1) | log(Sample 2) | log(Sample 3)
>     A | -Inf | 2.3 | 1.4
>     B | 0.7 | 1.8 | 2.5
>     C | 3.5 | 4.0 | 5.3
>
> 2. Average each row
>
>     Gene | Average of log values
>     A | -Inf
>     B | 1.7
>     C | 4.3
>
>     Average of log values (also call geometric average) is used here because it is not easily impacted by outliers (e.g. gene C with its outlier for Sample 3)
>
> 3. Filter out genes with infinity
>
>     Gene | Average of log values
>      | 
>     B | 1.7
>     C | 4.3
>

> >     It filters out genes with no read counts in at least 1 sample, e.g. genes only transcribed in one tissue as the gene D in the previous example. It helps to focus the scaling factors on genes transcribed at similar levels regardless the condition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>     It filters out genes with no read counts in at least 1 sample, e.g. genes only transcribed in one tissue as gene D in the previous example. It helps to focus the scaling factors on genes transcribed at similar levels regardless of the condition.
```

>
> 4. Substract the average log value from the log counts
>
>     Gene | log(Sample 1) | log(Sample 2) | log(Sample 3)
>      |  |  | 
>     B | -1.0 | 0.1 | 0.5
>     C | -0.8 | -0.3 | 1.3
>
>     $$log(\textrm{counts for gene X}) - average(\textrm{log values for counts for gene X}) = log(\frac{\textrm{counts for gene X}}{\textrm{average for gene X}})$$
>

> >     This step is checking out the ratio of the counts in each sample compared to the average across all samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>     This step compares the ratio of the counts in each sample to the average across all samples.
```

- Estimate the biological variance using the replicates for each condition
- Estimate the significance of expression differences between any two conditions

This expression analysis is estimated from read counts and attempts are made to correct for variability in measurements using replicates, that are absolutely essential for accurate results. For your own analysis, we advise you to use at least 3, but preferably 5 biological replicates per condition. It is possible to have different numbers of replicates per condition.

> ### {% icon comment %} Technical vs biological replicates
>
> A technical replicate is an experiment which is performed once but measured several times (e.g. multiple sequencing of the same library). A biological replicate is an experiment performed (and also measured) several times.
>
> In our data, we have 4 biological replicates (here called samples) without treatment and 3 biological replicates with treatment (*Pasilla* gene depleted by RNAi).
>

> > We recommend to combine the count tables for different technical replicates (but not for biological replicates) before a differential expression analysis.

Author: I added a link there

> This expression analysis is estimated from read counts and attempts are made to correct for variability in measurements using replicates, that are absolutely essential for accurate results. For your own analysis, we advise you to use at least 3, but preferably 5 biological replicates per condition. It is possible to have different number of replicates per condition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This expression analysis is estimated from read counts and attempts are made to correct for variability in measurements using replicates, that are absolutely essential for accurate results. For your own analysis, we advise you to use at least 3, but preferably 5 biological replicates per condition. It is possible to have different numbers of replicates per condition.
```

> This expression analysis is estimated from read counts and attempts are made to correct for variability in measurements using replicates, that are absolutely essential for accurate results. For your own analysis, we advise you to use at least 3, but preferably 5 biological replicates per condition. It is possible to have different number of replicates per condition.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to explain briefly the difference between biological and technical replicates or at least to make them aware that there is a difference

Author: Yep we should add an explanation there!

> [**DESeq2**](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) ({% cite love2014moderated %}) is a great tool for DGE analysis. It takes read counts and combines them into a big table (with genes in the rows and samples in the columns) and applies size factor normalization:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[**DESeq2**](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) ({% cite love2014moderated %}) is a great tool for differential gene expression (DGE) analysis. It takes read counts and combines them into a big table (with genes in the rows and samples in the columns) and applies size factor normalization:
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Determine differentially expressed features
>

> > 1. Create a new history

Author: Because we have now the 7 datasets and not only one. I found it more clean. But maybe I am wrong

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Is the FBgn0003360 gene differentially expressed because of the treatment? If yes, how much?
> 2. We could also hypothetically be interested in the effect of the sequencing (or other secondary factors in other cases). How would we know the differentially expressed genes because of sequencing type?
> 3. We would like to analyze the interaction between the treatment and the sequencing. 
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. FBgn0003360 is differentially expressed because of the treatment: it has a significant adjusted p-value ($$4.0 \cdot 10^{-178} << 0.05$$). It is less expressed (`-` in the log2FC column) in treated samples compared to untreated samples, by a factor ~8 ($$2^{log2FC} = 2^{2.99977727873544}$$).
> > 2. DESeq2 in Galaxy returns the comparison between the different levels for the 1st factor, after 
correction for the variability due to the 2nd factor. In our current case, treated against untreated for any sequencing type. To compare both sequencing types, we should run again DESeq2 by switching

> both factors: factor 1 (treatment) become factor 2 and factor 2 (sequencing) become factor 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
both factors: factor 1 (treatment) becomes factor 2 and factor 2 (sequencing) becomes factor 1.
```

> > > 3. To add the interaction between two factors (e.g. treated for paired-end data vs untreated for single-end), we should DESeq2 another time but with the only one factor with the following 4 levels:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > 3. To add the interaction between two factors (e.g. treated for paired-end data vs untreated for single-end), we should run DESeq2 another time but with only one factor with the following 4 levels:
```

We now have a table with 130 lines corresponding to the most differentially expressed genes. And for each of the gene, we have its id, its mean normalized counts (averaged over all samples from both conditions), its $$log_{2} FC$$ and other information.

> The id for each gene is something like FBgn0003360, i.e. an id in the corresponding database, here Flybase. These ids are unique but sometimes we prefer to have gene names, even if there may not reference an unique gene (e.g. duplicated after re-annotation). We would also like to have location of these genes. To do that, we need do add extra annotation from the annotation file we used for mapping and counting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ID for each gene is something like FBgn0003360, i.e. an ID in the corresponding database, here Flybase. These IDs are unique but sometimes we prefer to have gene names, even if there may not reference an unique gene (e.g. duplicated after re-annotation). We would also like to have location of these genes. To do that, we need do add extra annotations from the annotation file we used for mapping and counting.
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Annotation of the differentially expressed genes
>
> 1. Import the Ensembl gene annotation for *Drosophila melanogaster* (`Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf`) from the previous, from the Data library or from Zenodo:
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/1185122/files/Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf
>    ```
>
> 2. **Annotate DESeq2/DEXSeq output tables** {% icon tool %} with:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular output of DESeq2/edgeR/limma/DEXSeq"*: output of the last **Filter**
>    - *"Input file type"*: `DESeq2/edgeR/limma`

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"Reference annotation in GFF/GTF format"*: impored GTF file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Reference annotation in GFF/GTF format"*: imported GTF file
```

>
{: .hands_on}

The generated output is an extension of the previous file with some extra columns: chromosome, start, end, strand, feature and gene name

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>

> > 1. Where is located the most over-expressed gene?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 1. Where is the most over-expressed gene located?
```

> 2. What is the name of the gene?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >

> > > 1. FBgn0025111 (the first gene with a positive log2FC) is located on the reverse strand of chromosome X, between 10,778,953 bp and 10,786,907 bp.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > 1. FBgn0025111 (the top-ranked gene with the highest positive log2FC value) is located on the reverse strand of chromosome X, between 10,778,953 bp and 10,786,907 bp.
```

> > 2. Ant2, adenine nucleotide translocase 2
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

> The column names may not be obvious so we would like to add them before going further.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The column names may not be precise so we would like to add them before going further.
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Add column names
>
> 1. Create a new file from the following (header line of the DESeq2 output)
>
>      ```
>      GeneID	Base mean	log2(FC)	StdErr	Wald-Stats	P-value	P-adj	Chromosome	Start	End	Strand	Feature	Gene name
>      ```
>
>    {% include snippets/create_new_file.md format="tabular" %}
>
> 2. **Concatenate datasets** {% icon tool %} to add this header line to the **Annotate** output:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Concatenate Dataset"*: `Pasted entry` dataset
>    - *"Dataset"*
>       - Click on {% icon param-repeat %} `Insert Dataset`
>         - {% icon param-file %} *"select"*: output of **Annotate**
>
> 3. Rename the output to `Genes with significant adj p-value & abs(FC) > 2`
{: .hands_on}

## Visualization of the expression of the differentially expressed genes

We could plot the $$log_{2} FC$$ for the extracted genes, but here we would like to look at a heatmap of expression for these genes in the different samples. So we need to extract the normalized counts for these genes.

We proceed in several steps:

> - Extract and plot the normalized counts for these genes for each sample, using the normalized count file generated by DESeq2, with an heatmap

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Extract and plot the normalized counts for these genes for each sample with a heatmap, using the normalized count file generated by DESeq2
```

> - Compute, extract and plot the Z score of the normalized counts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Compute, extract and plot the Z-score of the normalized counts
```

> ### {% icon comment %} Advanced tutorials on visualization
>

> > In this tutorial, we will quickly explain some possible visualization. For more details, please have a look to the extra tutorials on visualization of RNA-seq results:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In this tutorial, we will quickly explain some possible visualization. For more details, please have a look in the extra tutorials on visualization of RNA-seq results:
```

> > - [Visualization of RNA-Seq results with heatmap2]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-viz-with-heatmap2/tutorial.md %})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> - [Visualization of RNA-seq results with heatmap2]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-viz-with-heatmap2/tutorial.md %})
```

> > - [Visualization of RNA-Seq results with Volcano Plot]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-viz-with-volcanoplot/tutorial.md %})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> - [Visualization of RNA-seq results with Volcano Plot]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-viz-with-volcanoplot/tutorial.md %})
```

{: .comment}

### Visualization of the normalized counts

> To extract the normalized counts for the interesting genes, we join the normalized count table generated by DESeq with the table we just generated. We will then keep only the lines corresponding to the most differentially expressed genes.

Reviewer 2: DESeq2 is used everywhere, right? This should be consistent in the text.

> To extract the normalized counts for the interesting genes, we join the normalized count table generated by DESeq with the table we just generated. We will then keep only the lines corresponding to the most differentially expressed genes.

Author: ```suggestion
To extract the normalized counts for the interesting genes, we join the normalized count table generated by DESeq2 with the table we just generated. We will then keep only the lines corresponding to the most differentially expressed genes.
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Extract the normalized counts of the most differentially expressed genes
> 3. **Join two Datasets** {% icon tool %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Join"*: the `Normalized counts` file (output of **DESeq2** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"using column"*: `Column: 1`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"with"*: `Genes with significant adj p-value & abs(FC) > 2`
>    - *"and column"*: `Column: 1`
>    - *"Keep lines of first input that do not join with second input"*: `No`
>    - *"Keep the header lines"*: `Yes`
>
>    The generated file has more columns than we need for the heatmap: mean normalized counts, $$log_{2} FC$$ and other annotation information. We need to remove the extra columns.
>
> 4. **Cut** {% icon tool %} to extract the columns with the gene ids and normalized counts:
>    - *"Cut columns"*: `c1-c8`
>    - *"Delimited by"*: `Tab`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"From"*: the joined dataset (output of **Join two Datasets** {% icon tool %})
>
> 5. Rename the output to `Normalized counts for the most differentially expressed genes`
{: .hands_on}

> We now have a table with 130 lines (the most differentially expressed genes) and the normalized counts for these genes in the 7 samples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We now have a table with 130 lines (the most differentially expressed genes) and the normalized counts for these genes across the 7 samples.
```

>
{: .hands_on}

We now have a table with 130 lines corresponding to the most differentially expressed genes. And for each of the gene, we have its ID, its mean normalized counts (averaged over all samples from both conditions), its $$log_{2} FC$$ and other information.

The ID for each gene is something like FBgn0003360, i.e. an ID in the corresponding database, here Flybase. These IDs are unique but sometimes we prefer to have gene names, even if there may not reference an unique gene (e.g. duplicated after re-annotation). We would also like to have location of these genes. To do that, we need do add extra annotations from the annotation file we used for mapping and counting.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Annotation of the differentially expressed genes
>

> > 1. Import the Ensembl gene annotation for *Drosophila melanogaster* (`Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf`) from the previous, from the Data library or from Zenodo:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 1. Import the Ensembl gene annotation for *Drosophila melanogaster* (`Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf`) from the previous history, or from the Shared Data library or from Zenodo:
```

> ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>

> > We recommend that you add as many factors as you think which may affect gene expression in your experiment. It can be the sequencing type like here, but it can also be the manipulation (if different persons are involved in the library preparation), other batch effects, etc...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We recommend that you add all factors you think may affect gene expression in your experiment. It can be the sequencing type like here, but it can also be the manipulation (if different persons are involved in the library preparation), other batch effects, etc...
```

>    
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Compute the Z-score for all genes
>    >
>    > To save time in this tutorial, we compute the Z-score directly on the normalized count of the most differentially expressed genes. In a standard analysis, we would compute the Z-score on all the genes (`Normalized count` file from **DESeq**) and then filter for the interesting genes as we did in the previous step.
>    {: .comment}
>
> 2. Inspect the output file
{: .hands_on}

We now have a table with the Z-score for the most differentially expressed genes in the 7 samples.

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. What is the range for the Z-score?
> 2. What can we say about the Z-scores for the differentially expressed genes?
> 3. Can we use the Z-score to estimate the strength of the differential expression of a gene?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. The Z-score ranges from -3 standard deviations up to +3 standard deviations. It can be placed on a normal distribution curve: -3 being the far left of the normal distribution curve and +3 thefar right of the normal distribution curve

> > > 2. When a gene is differentially expressed between two groups (here treated and untreated), the Z-scores for this gene will be (mostly) positive for the samples one group and (mostly) negative for the samples in the other group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> > 2. When a gene is differentially expressed between two groups (here treated and untreated), the Z-scores for this gene will be (mostly) positive for the samples in one group and (mostly) negative for the samples in the other group.
```

> > 3. The Z-score is a signal-to-noise ratio. Large absolute Z-scores, i.e. large positive or negative values, is not a direct estimate of the effect, i.e. the strength of the differential expression. A same large Z-score can have different meanings, depending on the noise:
> >    - with large noise: a very large effect
> >    - with some noise: a rather large effect
> >    - with only little noise: a rather small effect
> >    - with almost no noise: a tiny effect
> >
> >    The problem is that "noise" here is not only noise from the measure. It can also be linked to the "tightness" of the gene regulation control. Not tightly controlled genes, i.e. whose the expression may vary in a wide range over samples, can be considerably induced or repressed. Their absolute Z-score will be small as the variations over samples is big. In contrast, genes that are tightly controlled may have only very small changes in their expression, without any biological impact. The absolute Z-score will be large for these genes.
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

> We would like now to plot a heatmap for the Z-score:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We would like now to plot a heatmap for the Z-scores:
```

> ![Heatmap with the Z-scores counts for the most differentially expressed genes](../../images/ref-based/z-score-heatmap.png "Z-scores for the most differentially expressed genes")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Heatmap with the Z-score counts for the most differentially expressed genes](../../images/ref-based/z-score-heatmap.png "Z-scores for the most differentially expressed genes")
```

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Plot the Z-score of the most differentially expressed genes
> 1. **heatmap2** {% icon tool %} to plot the heatmap:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input should have column headers"*: the generated table (output of **Cut** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Advanced - log transformation"*/*"Data transformation"*: `Plot the data as it is`
>    - *"Enable data clustering"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Labeling columns and rows"*: `Label columns and not rows`
>    - *"Coloring groups"*: `Blue to white to red`
{: .hands_on}

## Analysis of functional enrichment among the differentially expressed genes

> We have extracted genes that are differentially expressed in treated (PS gene-depleted) samples compared to untreated samples. We would like to know if there are categories of genes that are enriched among the differentially expressed genes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have extracted genes that are differentially expressed in treated (PS gene-depleted) samples compared to untreated samples. Now, we would like to know if among the differentially expressed genes are enriched transcripts of genes which belong to more common or specific categories to classify their potential function a bit better. These categories are called Gene Ontologies (GO).
```

        > {: .solution}
        {: .question}

>     2. Heatmap of the sample-to-sample distance matrix (with clustering): overview over similarities and dissimilarities between samples

Author: I added a small paragraph there

        > {: .solution}
        {: .question}

    2. Heatmap of the sample-to-sample distance matrix (with clustering)
    

>         The heatmap gives an overview of similarities and dissimilarities between samples: the colors represents the distance between the samples. Darker blue means shorter distance, i.e. closer samples given the normalized counts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The heatmap gives an overview of similarities and dissimilarities between samples: the color represents the distance between the samples. Dark blue means shorter distance, i.e. closer samples given the normalized counts. 
```

    > >
    > >    **Group data** {% icon tool %} on column 7 (category) and count on column 1 (IDs)
    > >
    > {: .solution}
    {: .question}

2. A graph with the top 10 over-represented GO terms

    > ### {% icon question %} Questions
    > 
    > ![Top over-represented GO terms](../../images/ref-based/top_over-represented_go_terms.png)
    >
    > What is the x-axis? How is it computed?
    >
    > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
    > >
    > > The x-axis is the percentage of genes in the category that have been identified as differentially expressed: $$100 x \frac{numDEInCat}{numInCat}$$
    > >
    > {: .solution}
    {: .question}

3. A table with the differentially expressed genes (from the list we provided) associated to the GO terms (`DE genes for categories (GO/KEGG terms)`)

> ### {% icon comment %} Advanced tutorial on visualization
>
> In this tutorial, we covered GO enrichment analysis with **goseq**. To learn other gene set enrichment analysis, please have a look at the ["RNA-seq genes to pathways"]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-genes-to-pathways/tutorial.md %}) tutorial.
{: .comment}

### KEGG pathways

> **goseq** can also be used to identify interesting KEGG pathways. The KEGG pathway database is a collection of pathway maps representing the current knowledge on the molecular interaction, reaction and relation networks. A map can integreate many entities including genes, proteins, RNAs, chemical compounds, glycans, and chemical reactions, as well as disease genes and drug targets. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**goseq** can also be used to identify interesting KEGG pathways. The KEGG pathway database is a collection of pathway maps representing the current knowledge on the molecular interaction, reaction and relation networks. A map can integrate many entities including genes, proteins, RNAs, chemical compounds, glycans, and chemical reactions, as well as disease genes and drug targets. 
```

    > > 2. For over-represented, 21 BP, 4 CC and 4 MF - For under-represented, 45 BP, 30 CC and 6 MF - Group data on column 7 and count on column 1
    > >
    > {: .solution}
    {: .question}

2. A graph with the top 10 over-represented GO terms

    > ### {% icon question %} Questions
    > 
    > ![Top over-represented GO terms](../../images/ref-based/top_over-represented_go_terms.png)
    >
    > What is the x-axis? How is it computed?
    >
    > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
    > >
    > > The x-axis is the percentage of genes in the category that have been identified as differentially expressed: $$100 x \frac{numDEInCat}{numInCat}$$
    > >
    > {: .solution}
    {: .question}

3. A table with the differentially expressed genes (from the list we provided) associated to the GO terms

> ### {% icon comment %} Advanced tutorial on visualization
>
> In this tutorial, we covered GO enrichment analysis with **GOSeq**. To learn other gene set enrichment analysis, please have a look at the ["RNA-seq genes to pathways"]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-genes-to-pathways/tutorial.md %}) tutorial.
{: .comment}

### KEGG pathways

> **goseq** can also be used to identify interesting KEGG pathways:

Author: I added a description of KEGG pathways

We could investigate which genes are involved in which pathways by looking at the second file generated by **goseq**. But it can be cumbersome and there is one tool, **pathview** {% cite luo2013pathview %} to help visualization of how genes involved in pathways may be affected.

**pathview** needs 2 main information as inputs:
- Pathway id(s) to plot, either as just one id or as a file with one column with the pathway ids
- A tabular file with the genes in the RNA-seq experiment with 2 (or more) columns:
    - the gene IDs (unique within the file)
    - some information about the genes

      It can be for example a p-value or a fold change. This information will be added to the pathway plot: the node of the corresponding gene will be colored given the value. If there are different columns, the different information will plotted side by side on the gene node

Here we would like to visualize the top 2 over-represented KEGG pathways (without `01100`, the one with all metabolic pathways) and we would like that the gene nodes are colored by Log2 Fold Change for the differentially expressed genes because of the treatment.

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Perform GO analysis

Reviewer: Copy/paste error? I think this should mention KEGG not GO.

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Perform GO analysis

Author: ```suggestion
> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Perform KEGG enrichment analysis
```

The ID for each gene is something like FBgn0003360, i.e. an ID in the corresponding database, here Flybase. These IDs are unique but sometimes we prefer to have gene names, even if there may not reference an unique gene (e.g. duplicated after re-annotation). We would also like to have location of these genes. To do that, we need do add extra annotations from the annotation file we used for mapping and counting.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Annotation of the differentially expressed genes
>
> 1. Import the Ensembl gene annotation for *Drosophila melanogaster* (`Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf`) from the previous history, or from the Shared Data library or from Zenodo:
>
>    ```
>    {{ page.zenodo_link }}/files/Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf
>    ```
>
> 2. **Annotate DESeq2/DEXSeq output tables** {% icon tool %} with:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular output of DESeq2/edgeR/limma/DEXSeq"*: output of the last **Filter**
>    - *"Input file type"*: `DESeq2/edgeR/limma`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Reference annotation in GFF/GTF format"*: imported GTF file
>
{: .hands_on}

> The generated output is an extension of the previous file with some extra columns: chromosome, start, end, strand, feature and gene name

Author: Added

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Where is the most over-expressed gene located?
> 2. What is the name of the gene?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. FBgn0025111 (the top-ranked gene with the highest positive log2FC value) is located on the reverse strand of chromosome X, between 10,778,953 bp and 10,786,907 bp.

> > > 2. Ant2, adenine nucleotide translocase 2

Author: I changed the answer to "From the table, we got the short ucut of the gene name: Ant2. After some search on the Internet and biological databases, we can found that Ant2 corresponds to adenine nucleotide"

> - [Visualization of RNA-seq results with heatmap2]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-viz-with-heatmap2/tutorial.md %})
> - [Visualization of RNA-seq results with Volcano Plot]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/rna-seq-viz-with-volcanoplot/tutorial.md %})
{: .comment}

### Visualization of the normalized counts

To extract the normalized counts for the interesting genes, we join the normalized count table generated by DESeq2 with the table we just generated. We will then keep only the lines corresponding to the most differentially expressed genes.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Extract the normalized counts of the most differentially expressed genes
> 3. **Join two Datasets** {% icon tool %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Join"*: the `Normalized counts` file (output of **DESeq2** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"using column"*: `Column: 1`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"with"*: `Genes with significant adj p-value & abs(FC) > 2`
>    - *"and column"*: `Column: 1`
>    - *"Keep lines of first input that do not join with second input"*: `No`

> >    - *"Keep the header lines"*: `Yes`

Author: These are default values. It is why I did not add them. Should I?

>
>    The generated file has more columns than we need for the heatmap: mean normalized counts, $$log_{2} FC$$ and other annotation information. We need to remove the extra columns.
>

> > 4. **Cut** {% icon tool %} to extract the columns with the gene IDs and normalized counts:

Author: We should tell them during the workshop about that. There were ongoing discussions on these 2 tools

>
>    ```
>    {{ page.zenodo_link }}/files/Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.87.gtf
>    ```
>
> 2. **Annotate DESeq2/DEXSeq output tables** {% icon tool %} with:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular output of DESeq2/edgeR/limma/DEXSeq"*: output of the last **Filter**
>    - *"Input file type"*: `DESeq2/edgeR/limma`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Reference annotation in GFF/GTF format"*: imported GTF file
>
{: .hands_on}

The generated output is an extension of the previous file:
1. Gene identifiers
2. Mean normalized counts over all samples
3. Log2 fold change
4. Standard error estimate for the log2 fold change estimate
5. Wald statistic
6. *p*-value for the Wald statistic
7. *p*-value adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure for the Wald statistic
8. Chromosome
9. Start
10. End
11. Strand
12. Feature
13. Gene name

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Where is the most over-expressed gene located?
> 2. What is the name of the gene?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. FBgn0025111 (the top-ranked gene with the highest positive log2FC value) is located on the reverse strand of chromosome X, between 10,778,953 bp and 10,786,907 bp.

> > > 2. From the table, we got the short ucut of the gene name: Ant2. After some search on the Internet and biological databases, we can found that Ant2 corresponds to adenine nucleotide translocase 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > 2. From the table, we got the gene symbol: Ant2. After some search on the [online biological databases](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/32008), we can found that Ant2 corresponds to adenine nucleotide translocase 2.
```

>    - *"Delimited by"*: `Tab`
>    - *"To"*: `Upper case`
>
> 4. Rename the output to `Gene IDs and differentially expression`
>
>    We just generated the first input for **goseq**. As second input for **goseq** we need the gene lengths. We can use here the gene lengths generated by **featureCounts** {% icon tool %} and format the gene IDs.
>

> > 5. Drag and drop of the gene length file generated by **featureCounts** {% icon tool %} into this history using the {% icon galaxy-columns %} **View all histories**

Reviewer 2: Here, it is not clear which files. In the first tutorial history there are 2 feature counts lengths files. One from GSM461180 and one from GSM461177. Shall I take both (I did now to see further in the tutorial)

Author: Only one file is needed: I changed to "Drag and drop one of the gene length file"

>    - *"Gene lengths file"*: `Gene IDs and length`
>    - *"Gene categories"*: `Get categories`
>       - *"Select a genome to use"*: `Fruit fly (dm6)`
>       - *"Select Gene ID format"*: `Ensembl Gene ID`
>       - *"Select one or more categories"*: `KEGG`
>    - In *"Output Options"*
>      - *"Output Top GO terms plot?"*: `No`
>      - *"Extract the DE genes for the categories (GO/KEGG terms)?"*: `Yes`
>
{: .hands_on}

As for the GO terms, 2 files are generated:

1. A big table with the KEGG terms and some statistics

    > ### {% icon question %} Questions
    >
    > 1. How many KEGG pathways terms have been identified?
    > 2. How many KEGG pathways terms are over-represented with an adjusted P value < 0.05?
    > 3. What are the over-represented KEGG pathways terms?
    > 4. How many KEGG pathways terms are under-represented with an adjusted P value < 0.05?
    >
    > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
    > >
    > > 1. The file has 127 lines including an header, so 126 KEGG pathways have been identified.
    > > 2. 2 KEGG pathways (1.57%) are over-represented, using **Filter** {% icon tool %} on c6 (adjusted p-value for over-represented KEGG pathways)

>     > > 3. The first 3 KEGG pathways are:

Reviewer 2: I do not understand how to get this result. In question 1 it is said that 2 KEGG paythways are overrepresented. Why here it is said "the first 3 KEGG pathways are" ... then there 2 two given ...
I ask myself how do I get this information about the KEGG pathway name?

 The first 3 KEGG pathways are:

    01100: Metabolic pathways, all metabolic pathways
    00010: Glycolysis / Gluconeogenesis

Author: Before there were 3 KEGG pathways. So it should be fixed now.

I also added a sentence on searching on KEGG database to find the information about these pathways

    > >    - `01100`: Metabolic pathways, all metabolic pathways
    > >    - `00010`: Glycolysis / Gluconeogenesis
    > > 4. 1 KEGG pathways (0.79%) is under-represented, using **Filter** {% icon tool %} on c7 (adjusted p-value for under-represented KEGG pathways): `03040`, Spliceosome
    > {: .solution}
    {: .question}

> 2. A table with the differentially expressed genes (from the list we provided) associated to the KEGG pathways

Reviewer 2: output is called "DE genes for categories (GO/KEGG terms)"

Author: Added

>    - *"Gene lengths file"*: `Gene IDs and length`
>    - *"Gene categories"*: `Get categories`
>       - *"Select a genome to use"*: `Fruit fly (dm6)`
>       - *"Select Gene ID format"*: `Ensembl Gene ID`
>       - *"Select one or more categories"*: `KEGG`
>    - In *"Output Options"*
>      - *"Output Top GO terms plot?"*: `No`
>      - *"Extract the DE genes for the categories (GO/KEGG terms)?"*: `Yes`
>
{: .hands_on}

As for the GO terms, 2 files are generated:

1. A big table with the KEGG terms and some statistics

    > ### {% icon question %} Questions
    >
    > 1. How many KEGG pathways terms have been identified?
    > 2. How many KEGG pathways terms are over-represented with an adjusted P value < 0.05?
    > 3. What are the over-represented KEGG pathways terms?
    > 4. How many KEGG pathways terms are under-represented with an adjusted P value < 0.05?
    >
    > > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
    > >
    > > 1. The file has 127 lines including an header, so 126 KEGG pathways have been identified.
    > > 2. 2 KEGG pathways (1.57%) are over-represented, using **Filter** {% icon tool %} on c6 (adjusted p-value for over-represented KEGG pathways)

>     > > 3. The first 2 KEGG pathways are `01100` and `00010`. By searching on the [KEGG database](https://www.genome.jp/kegg/kegg2.html) for them, we found more information about these pathways: `01100` corresponds to all metabolic pathways and `00010` to pathway for Glycolysis / Gluconeogenesis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > > 3. The first 2 KEGG pathways are `01100` and `00010`. By searching on the [KEGG database](https://www.genome.jp/kegg/kegg2.html) for them, we can find more information about these pathways: `01100` corresponds to all metabolic pathways and `00010` to pathway for Glycolysis / Gluconeogenesis.
```

# Conclusion
{:.no_toc}

> In this tutorial, we have analyzed real RNA sequencing data to extract useful information, such as which genes are up or downregulated by depletion of the *Pasilla* gene but also which GO terms or KEGG pathways they are involved in. To answer these questions, we analyzed RNA sequence datasets using a reference-based RNA-seq data analysis approach. This approach can be summarized with the following scheme:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we have analyzed real RNA sequencing data to extract useful information, such as which genes are up or downregulated by depletion of the *Pasilla* gene, but also which GO terms or KEGG pathways they are involved in. To answer these questions, we analyzed RNA sequence datasets using a reference-based RNA-seq data analysis approach. This approach can be summarized with the following scheme:
```
